Copyedit, reformat, style consistency (#6720)
MystenLabs/sui: doc/src/contribute/observability.md

**Note:** The output here is largely for the consumption of Sui operators, administrators, and developers. The content of logs and traces do not represent the authoritative, certified output of validators and are subject to potentially byzantine behavior.

## Contexts, scopes, and tracing transaction flow

In a distributed and asynchronous system like Sui, one cannot rely on looking at individual logs over time in a single thread. To solve this problem, use the approach of structured logging. Structured logging offers a way to tie together logs, events, and blocks of functionality across threads and process boundaries.

### Spans and events

In the [Tokio tracing](https://tokio.rs/blog/2019-08-tracing) library, structured logging is implemented using [spans and events](https://docs.rs/tracing/0.1.31/tracing/index.html#core-concepts).
Spans cover a whole block of functionality - like one function call, a future or asynchronous task, etc. They can be nested, and key-value pairs in spans give context to events or logs inside the function.

>  * spans and their key-value pairs add essential context to enclosed logs, such as a transaction ID.

Author: typically, but this felt more like it should just a descriptive paragraph in the future over a list

Vector2 --> ElasticSearch
```

In the graph above, there are multiple subscribers, JSON logs can be for example fed via a local sidecar log forwarder such as [Vector](https://vector.dev), and then onwards to destinations such as ElasticSearch.

The use of a log and metrics aggregator such as Vector allows for easy reconfiguration without interrupting the validator server, as well as offloading observability traffic.

Metrics: served with a Prometheus scrape endpoint, by default at `<host>:9184/metrics`.

### Stdout (default)

By default, logs (but not spans) are formatted for human readability and output to stdout, with key-value tags at the end of every line.

You can configure `RUST_LOG` for custom logging output, including filtering - see the [Logging levels](#logging-levels) section earlier in this topic.

### Tracing and span output

To generate detailed span start and end logs, define the `SUI_JSON_SPAN_LOGS` environment variable. Note that this causes all output to be in JSON format, which is not as human-readable, so it is not enabled by default.

You can send this output to a tool or service for indexing, alerts, aggregation, and analysis.

> The example output below shows certificate processing in the authority with span logging. Note the START and END annotations, and notice how DB_UPDATE_STATE which is nested is embedded within PROCESS_CERT. Also notice `elapsed_milliseconds` which logs the duration of each span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example output shows certificate processing in the authority with span logging. Note the `START` and `END` annotations, and notice how `DB_UPDATE_STATE` which is nested is embedded within `PROCESS_CERT`. Also notice `elapsed_milliseconds`, which logs the duration of each span.
```

1. Run this to get a local Jaeger container:
   ```shell
   docker run -d -p6831:6831/udp -p6832:6832/udp -p16686:16686 jaegertracing/all-in-one:latest
   ```
1. Run Sui like this (trace enables the most detailed spans):
   ```shell
   SUI_TRACING_ENABLE=1 RUST_LOG="info,sui_core=trace" ./sui start
   ```
1. Run some transfers with Sui CLI client, or run the benchmarking tool.
1. Browse to `http://localhost:16686/` and select Sui as the service.

> **Note:** - Separate spans (that are not nested) are not connected as a single trace for now.

Reviewer: : - ?

1. Start Sui with `SUI_TOKIO_CONSOLE` set to 1.
1. Clone the console repo and `cargo run` to launch the console.

> **Note:** Adding Tokio-console support may significantly slow down Sui validators/gateways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** Adding Tokio-console support might significantly slow down Sui validators/gateways.
```

### Memory profiling

Sui uses the [jemalloc memory allocator](https://jemalloc.net/) by default on most platforms, and there is code that enables automatic memory profiling using jemalloc's sampling profiler, which is very lightweight and designed for production use.  The profiling code spits out profiles at most every 5 minutes, and only when total memory has increased by a default 20%.  Profiling files are named `jeprof.<TIMESTAMP>.<memorysize>MB.prof` so that it is easy to 
correlate to metrics and incidents, for ease of debugging.

For the memory profiling to work, you need to set the environment variable `_RJEM_MALLOC_CONF=prof:true`. If you use the [Docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/mysten/sui-node) they are set automatically.

> Note that running some allocator-based heap profilers such as [Bytehound](https://github.com/koute/bytehound) will essentially disable automatic jemalloc profiling, because they interfere with or don't implement `jemalloc_ctl` stats APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running some allocator-based heap profilers such as [Bytehound](https://github.com/koute/bytehound) will essentially disable automatic jemalloc profiling, because they interfere with or don't implement `jemalloc_ctl` stats APIs.
```

1. Run `jeprof --svg sui-node jeprof.xxyyzz.heap` - select the heap profile based on 
   timestamp and memory size in the filename.

> Note: with automatic memory profiling, it is no longer necessary to configure environment variables beyond what is required above.  It is possible to configure custom profiling options, see the links below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** With automatic memory profiling, it is no longer necessary to configure environment variables beyond those previously listed.  It is possible to configure custom profiling options:
```
